Linux
1. Linux Basics & File System
2. User and Group Management
3. Networking in Linux
4. Process and Service Management
5. Package Management
6. File Permissions & Ownership
7. Disk Management & LVM -- not required as of 



git 
1. Git Fundamentals
2. Branching and Merging
3.Advanced Git Operations
4. Remote Repositories and Collaboration
5. Git in CI/CD Pipelines
6. Best Practices and Troubleshooting


1. Git Fundamentals:

    Version Control Concepts: Understand the purpose of version control, distributed vs. centralized systems, and the Git workflow (working directory, staging area, local repository).
    Basic Git Commands: 

Code

    git init
    git add
    git commit
    git status
    git log
    git diff

    Repositories: Creating, cloning, and managing local and remote repositories.
    Ignoring Files: Using .gitignore to exclude unwanted files from version control. 

2. Branching and Merging:

    Branching Concepts: Understanding the purpose and benefits of branching for parallel development and feature isolation.
    Branch Management Commands: 

Code

    git branch
    git checkout
    git merge

    Merge Conflicts: Resolving conflicts that arise during merging.
    Git Workflows: Familiarity with common workflows like Gitflow, Feature Branching, and Trunk-Based Development. 

3. Advanced Git Operations:

    Rebasing:
    Understanding the concept and use cases of git rebase for cleaning up commit history.
    Cherry-Picking:
    Applying specific commits from one branch to another using git cherry-pick.
    Stashing:
    Temporarily saving changes using git stash.
    Resetting and Reverting:
    Understanding git reset and git revert for undoing changes and managing history.
    Tagging:
    Using git tag for marking significant points in the repository's history (e.g., releases). 

4. Remote Repositories and Collaboration:

    Working with Remotes: Adding, fetching, pulling, and pushing to remote repositories (e.g., GitHub, GitLab, Azure Repos).
    Pull Requests/Merge Requests: Understanding and utilizing these for code review and collaboration.
    Forks: Working with forks in open-source projects. 

5. Git in CI/CD Pipelines:

    Git Hooks:
    Understanding and using pre-commit, post-commit, and other hooks for automating tasks.
    Integration with CI/CD Tools:
    How Git interacts with tools like Jenkins, GitLab CI, GitHub Actions, Azure DevOps Pipelines for automated builds, tests, and deployments.
    Infrastructure as Code (IaC):
    Using Git to version control infrastructure configurations (e.g., Terraform, Ansible playbooks). 

6. Best Practices and Troubleshooting:

    Commit Message Conventions: Writing clear and concise commit messages.
    Handling Large Files: Strategies for managing large files in Git (e.g., Git LFS).
    Security: Managing sensitive information and credentials securely within Git repositories.
    Troubleshooting Common Git Issues: Debugging and resolving common problems like detached HEAD, untracked files, etc.
	
	
	
	