control flow 

In the next chapter of our tale, Script the messenger reaches the Crossroads of Logic. The path is no longer a straight line; now, he must make choices and sometimes walk in circles to get the job done.

1. The Gatekeeper’s Choice: If, Elif, and Else
As Script approaches the Great Gate of Kernel-Land, he meets a Gatekeeper who uses Conditional Statements to decide who enters.

if: The primary rule. "If you have the key, come in."

elif (Else-If): The backup rule. "If you don't have the key, but you have a royal pass, come in."

else: The final result. "If you have neither, go away!"

In the language of the kingdom, it looks like this:

Bash

if [ $HAS_KEY == "yes" ]; then
  echo "Welcome home!"
elif [ $HAS_PASS == "yes" ]; then
  echo "You may enter with your pass."
else
  echo "Access denied!"
fi
Important: Every if decree must be closed with fi (which is "if" spelled backward), signaling the end of that specific decision.

2. The Grand Hall of Masks: The Case Statement
Sometimes, Script meets a large crowd of different people (merchants, knights, wizards). Using if-elif-elif-elif would make his parchment too long. Instead, he uses a case statement—like a room with many doors.

Bash

case $USER_TYPE in
  "Knight") echo "To the armory!" ;;
  "Wizard") echo "To the library!" ;;
  "Merchant") echo "To the market!" ;;
  *) echo "I don't know you." ;;
esac
The *) is the "default" door for anyone who doesn't fit the other descriptions.

3. The Farmer’s Field: The For Loop
Script moves on to the royal farms. The farmer has a row of baskets, and Script must put an apple in each one. This is a for loop. It’s used when you know exactly how many times you need to do something.

Bash

for BASKET in 1 2 3 4 5
do
  echo "Dropping an apple into basket number $BASKET"
done
4. The Leaky Boat: While and Until Loops
Finally, Script must cross the Great River in a leaky boat. He has to use Iteration (repeating an action) based on a condition.

while: "Keep doing this as long as the condition is true."

While there is water in the boat, scoop it out!

until: "Keep doing this until the condition becomes true."

Until the boat is dry, keep scooping!

Bash

# While example
while [ $WATER_LEVEL -gt 0 ]
do
  echo "Scooping water..."
  ((WATER_LEVEL--))  # Removing water
done
The Story So Far...
Script has learned to check credentials at the gate, sort crowds into doors, and repeat tasks until the work is finished. With these powers, he is no longer just a messenger—he is a Governor of Logic.